Helen Levitt’s photographs are dying to talk.

Helen Levitt (1913-2009) is an American photographer, well known for her street photography around New York City. She is largely influenced by Walker Evans, Henri Cartier-Bresson and Ben Shahn on catching everyday life and ordinary subjects (Loke). 

During late 1930s and early 1940s, Levitt created an astonishing body of photographs. “At the peak of Helen’s form,” John Szarkowski, former director of the photography department at the Museum of Modern Art, once said, “there was no one better.” (Loke). The photograph of three children dressing them up for trick-or-treat on Halloween in 1940 perfectly demonstrates Levitt’s instinct for a visually exciting stage of street life. Three kids stand on the door stoop in the order of their readiness for the once-in-a-year kids’ banquet. The girl in a lovely dress on the higher stair is preparing the final step of her costume—putting on her mask. The boy next to her with his mask already on is slowly stepping down from the higher stair to the lower one and in the meantime the boy on the most right, fully dressed up, stands on the lower stair, confidently overlooking the world like a king. It looks to me no difference from a backstage of a theatre before the formal beginning of a play where every actor and actress is almost ready for the opening but some of them are still doing their final dress-up, some are practicing the steps in a particular scene and the rest are calmly waiting for the open of stage curtains to show their audiences that they are the kings of tonight.

Drama is everywhere in Levitt’s black and white photographs—a white girl and a black boy dancing in their own imagining, a boy lifting a girl’s dress to peep her butt, a mother’s head disappearing into the stroller, couples regarding each other on the subway, the middle-aged man staring stolidly at the sidewalk or conversing languidly with another woman. This makes it paradoxical to savor Levitt’s photographs that it seems “there are no unusual happenings” (Szarkowski 138) but every photograph reveals the contrast, impossibility and surprise in its own way dramatically. The high consciousness of the self-unconscious lively neighborhoods makes Levitt distinguish from other photographers.

In 1960s, Levitt was among the first photographers to adopt color (Loke). She doesn’t want to let viewers enjoy color for their own sake but wants to employ color as an added layer to the texture of the human environment (Schwartz 179). The weathered green, faded blue and brick red softens the pitch of her drama on the street, gradually revealing humor, pathos and movements gracefully. In her book Crosstown (2001), I see photograph that draws a family stuffed into a phone booth. I see photograph of a girl crouching her body between a car and the sidewalk. I see photograph that depicts baseball player at the moment of swinging his body, with the wall behind happening to present a mural of a ball player in the similar gesture but looking into the opposite direction. Twenty years after the peak of Levitt’s work, the energy of the New York street is still there. Disparate events happen at once but Levitt’s discerning eyes manage to quickly capture the impulse and embody the drama. Although viewers need more time to absorb and digest the tone and density in Levitt’s color photographs, we can easily feel the delicacy and precision of a city’s spirit in her frames.

Levitt’s photographs are dying to perform—perform the routineness of a New York City street as well as the high art of a dramatic world where every one of us lives in but has long neglected the human atmosphere in it. 

 
Works cited
Levitt, Helen. Crosstown. New York: powerhouse Books, 2001. Print.
Loke, Margarett. “Helen Levitt, Who Froze New York Street Life on Film, is Dead at 95.” New York Times. New York Times, 30 Mar. 2009. Web. 31 Mar. 2014. 
Schwartz, Sanford. The Art Presence. New York: Horizon Press, 1982. Print.
Szarkowski, John. Looking at Photographs: 100 Pictures from the Collection of the Museum of Modern Art. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1973. Print.

